---
layout: page
title: Research
permalink: research
---

# **Disease and decisions** {#disease-decisions}

<img src="https://mjharris95.github.io/disease-decision.jpg" align="left" width="243"/>

During an infectious disease outbreak, individuals and governments may
respond to their perceived or actual vulnerability to severe by adopting
protective measures. interplay between behavior and disease may produce
complicated, nonlinear dynamics. I used mathematical modeling to study
how awareness-based protective behavior in populations with strong group
divisions can fundamentally alter epidemic shape and size
([paper](https://doi.org/10.1017/ehs.2023.2)).
Using county-level data from the state of Georgia, I found an
association between early implementation of public heath measures and
reduced mobility in counties with the greatest risk of large outbreaks
([paper](https://digitalcommons.georgiasouthern.edu/jgpha/vol8/iss2/4/)).
I also helped develop a
[website](https://covid19risk.biosci.gatech.edu/) displaying real-time
risks of COVID-19 exposure at events by county to support more informed
decision-making ([paper](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-01000-9)). Working with a large Twitter dataset, I showed that perceived experts are a sizable and important group within the anti-vaccine community ([paper](https://academic.oup.com/pnasnexus/article/3/2/pgae007/7601415?login=false)).

# **Predicting and preventing outbreaks**

<img src="https://mjharris95.github.io/predict-prevent.png" align="left" width="252"/>

Infectious diseases may emerge and re-emerge rapidly and early public
health measures can be especially crucial to avoid large outbreaks. I
applied statistical methods based on the theory of critical slowing down
to detect early warning signals preceding a historical malaria
resurgence in Kericho, Kenya
([paper](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2019.0713)). I contributed to a
model predicting West Nile Virus neuroinvasive disease, which
consistently outperformed an ensemble model of forecasts submitted to a
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention forecasting challenge
([paper](https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-1992050/v1)). Using an
early model of COVID-19 transmission, I helped estimate the impact of
initial nonpharmaceutical interventions in Santa Clara County and
evaluated how near-term forecasting accuracy of the model changed over
time, generalizing to models initialized under conditions of
considerable uncertainty in the early stages of an outbreak of a novel
pathogen ([paper](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2021.0811)).

# **Climate change and vector-borne disease**

<img src="https://mjharris95.github.io/climate-vbd.png" align="left" width="252"/>

Anthropogenic climate change is a major threat to human and planetary
heath. In particular, transmission of mosquito-borne diseases like
malaria and Zika is expected to shift dramatically because of the
temperature sensitivity of mosquito vectors. I showed that transmission
of Zika in Latin America exhibited a nonlinear relationship with
temperature, peaking at intermediate temperatures
([paper](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2019.1578)). I participated in a
literature review demonstrating how different observed correlations
between dengue cases and temperature are predicted by work from mosquito
thermal biology
([pre-print](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.06.15.496305v1.abstract)).
I also contributed to a [book
chapter](https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198853244.001.0001) examining
how climate and other environmental factors may influence vector-borne
disease and a [paper](doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69630) synthesizing evidence
on how mosquitoes may adapt to climate change, with implications for
disease transmission.

You can earn more about my dissertation research by checking out this [poster](https://mjharris95.github.io/Dissertation-Poster.pdf) or watching this [recording](https://stanford.zoom.us/rec/share/m-lKdD77bo20o2NVlLURxQtEZseesbFWK77Ts6ufh43l_guskRu7kgl_2Yqr_jak.74U7rS5lkAqAa1yX?startTime=1715706043000) of my defense!
